Our Gun Culture Verses our Gun Rights
=====================================

The joint wisdom of pro-gun and anti-gun people in America is that _our gun culture protects gun rights_. I believe this needs to be questioned. Individuals that face the highest risks of being violated are the most likely to not have full gun rights. American gun culture is joined at the hip with various attitudes that run counter to ensuring equal rights for disadvantaged groups or otherwise allowing gun rights to do the good gun proponents claim it can do.

It's true that _if you have access to guns_, you have access to a wide array of types of guns and have more freedom to have them on your person than you would in virtually any other developed nation. But you're not so likely to have that right if you're from a disadvantaged group or on the wrong side of the law.

Another bipartisan belief is "the only way to stop a bad guy with a gun is a good guy with a gun". This is a catch phrase of NRA types, but it's pretty broadly bought into implicitly. You might see good guys as cops and private citizens who pass a background check or you might narrow that list to just certain cops. Unless you are of the minority opinion that _no one_ should have guns, you can't truly say you disagree with the statement. The question is who we consider bad guys. That often means criminals. Who commits crime? A better way to phrase the question is "whose livelihoods are criminalized?" The answer of course is disadvantaged groups, people driven to taboo and illegal activities by discrimination, which means the same people most likely to experience violence.

SOME NUMBERS ON RATES BETWEEN VIOLENCE <-> MINORITY STATUS, PLUS NUMBERS ON CRIMINALIZATION <-> MINORITY STATUS

If, despite all the potential obstacles, someone has the _de jure_ right to guns or having guns on their person in public places, that doesn't automatically translate to the _de facto_ right. A law, after all, is a vague threat that you can suffer violence for breaking it, so if cops see any armed Black man as dangerous, the right to carry isn't real for them even in states where the letter of the law assures it. In a country where a cop can [gun down a Black child with a toy gun and get away with it](http://www.vox.com/2014/11/24/7275297/tamir-rice-police-shooting), ENUMERATE WITH MORE STATS, it's difficult to conclude that _any_ African American truly has the right to carry.

Behind our strong cultural belief in gun rights is the idea that the world is dangerous, it's full of dangerous people, and you need to use force to protect yourself sometimes. This bodes well for the right of a rich White property owner to have a gun in their house in preparation for exotic threats like hot break-ins. But not if you're in the out-group, if you're thought of as dangerous, if you ever got in trouble or got diagnosed. It's not to the benefit of a trans women of color who's been pushed by discrimination into prostitution and faces a much more realistic threat of violence. Note how it's exactly the most die-hard gun nuts who are quick to blame those diagnosed with mental illness when tragedy strikes LINK TO STUPID CRAZY-SHAMING ARTICLE. They see neurodivergent people and drug dealers as a threat to their own gun collection and care nothing about them as people, much less _their_ right to own weapons and protect themselves. Even anti-gun people join the pro-gun people in the crazy-shaming, framing the problem as keeping guns out of the hands of mentally ill people, rather than buying into a more realistic, and less ableist, view of who is and isn't dangerous.

Gun people are quick to point out the alleged hypocricy of pro-gun control politicians protecting themselves with armed body guards LINK. And their detractors are quick to point out the silliness of the belief that everyone is under equal threat of violence LINK. It's true that public figures are at a greater risk of assassination attempts than the general public is of murder attempts. But that's not the only dividing line. People living in more violent areas (which usually means lower-income individuals) face more violence. Blacks face more violence than Whites CITATION. LGBT+ individuals, especially trans women, face extraordinarily high rates of violence CITATION. Unlike public figures, most of these people can't afford body guards.

If you own weapons, there's some risk that you might accidentally hurt yourself or someone you didn't mean to with them GIVE THAT RATE. There's also some likelihood that you could protect yourself or others with them THAT RATE TOO. For most people, the likelihood of both of those things are rather small but the latter is smaller. I imagine a cross section of humanity graphed against the likelihood of positive use divided by the likelihood of accidents. There must be some people who exist above the line (if I'm wrong, then there's no reason for anyone to have guns). I contend it is those people who are the most likely to not have a right to own weapons who fall above the 100% line. Therefore, we do not usefully have a right to self defense. We only have a right to engage in an expensive hobby.

Most people identify with their own government to some degree. Even if they largely disagree with its actions, they see government guns as vital to their own safety as they see their own. The people who oppose reductions in military or police presence the most are the ones who oppose restrictions on gun rights the most, generally speaking. This could be looked at as simply a matter of how the conservative platform happened to evolve here but I contend it's because the reasoning is similar in both cases. It's not about viewing gun rights as a human right, it's about "I'm going to be scary and dangerous to protect myself from danger". This association means that guns can never be a way to protect against government tyranny. The idea of standing up to our military with our guns is so laughable, especially given the people who tend to hold the position, that it [was the subject of one of Clickhole's finer gags](http://www.clickhole.com/blogpost/its-our-duty-support-troops-and-second-amendment-c-1929).

If you believe that protection from government tyranny is a valid reason to support gun rights, then you _must_ be for massive reduction of government guns. Police are more likely than the general public to be domestic abusers, and domestic abusers can be trusted with guns the least CITATION. Police use their guns to enforce unjust laws. Our military fights unjust wars. And yet "people who believe in gun rights" and "people who see the military and police as threats" scarecely overlap. Where it does overlap is mostly libertarians, a group that unfortunately tends to have a lot of conservative baggage LINK TO ARTICLE ABOUT PALEO STRATEGY and hence many of the same problems as the mainstream pro-gun crowd. If disadvantaged groups aren't central to your campaign to protect gun rights, then you simply aren't protecting gun rights.

Whether you see gun rights as something worthy of protection or not, the American gun movement and our gun culture aren't your friends. If there are good arguments to be put forth, it's by taking a firm grasp of reality and not escaping the problems inheret in our culture. We must not only dismantle the various laws that increase violence like the war on drugs (more properly thought of as the war on drug users) and the war on sex workers, but also strike at the root causes of murder and assault like toxic masculinity, white supremacy, heterosexism and transantagonism.

ARM TRANS WOMEN  
DISARM COPS
