# Ruled by Documents

Riding a wave of backlash to social and legal gains made by trans individuals and a misinformation campaign based on [unfounded fears](http://mediamatters.org/blog/2014/03/20/debunking-the-big-myth-about-transgender-inclus/198530), North Carolina's legislature hurredly [passed a sweeping, unprecedented anti-LGBT law](www.vox.com/2016/2/23/11100552/charlotte-north-carolina-lgbtq-pat-mccrory). The law bans any laws at the local level to bring legal protections for LGBT individuals to parity with those already existing for race, religion and other protected categories. It also disallows anyone from using a public gendered bathroom incongruous with the gender as stated on their birth certificate. This manages to target the most vulnerable trans invididuals of all, including trans children and low income trans people while also threatening the rights of the general population.

Legal gender, far from the coherent whole imagined by the cis (non-trans) public, lives in multiple different documents, which could contradict each other. Like most states, [North Carolina requires genital reconstruction surgery](http://www.lambdalegal.org/know-your-rights/transgender/changing-birth-certificate-sex-designations) before reissuing a birth certificate that properly reflects the gender the person lives as. This procedures isn't done by [a majority of trans individuals](http://www.advocate.com/politics/transgender/2014/03/13/watch-debunking-surgery-top-priority-trans-people-myth), in many cases because the individual simply has no desire to do so, in others because they can't afford it and their insurance doesn't cover it. Virtually all trans children will not have done this procedure, though they may be enrolled in school as their authentic gender (again, the documents don't necessarily agree).

This elevates the importance of the birth certificate, as trans individuals are often able to live perfectly fine lives without amending it, changing only drivers licenses and other documents. This requirement is inherently classist, as [explaind out by Ramona Knives](http://empireofloathing.com/index.php/2016/03/25/guest-post-papers-please/):

> Having an expensive surgery done, paying for a new birth certificate and all other associated fees, and presenting it each time we dare to use a public restroom sounds like a lot of work for what should be an inalienable right no matter if you’re trans or cis. Any rational person could see that, but then again, the rich cis elite care less about rational thought and more about ensuring that the only trans people who could qualify would be the wealthy and more than likely cis-passing ones, whom they would probably not figure to be trans in the first place. This piece of the law inherently excludes the poor, which accounts for a huge number of open trans people, and especially the homeless, who have to rely on public restrooms or risk arrest and possible death at the hands of police for urinating or defecating outside. These are the people hurt most by this law, and the domino effect of other classist laws ensure that they will get the worst of every discriminatory law passed in this country, while the Caitlyn Jenners of the states will tell us all about how #itgetsbetter.

And ironically, if you take the rhetoric more seriously than those who spout it take it themselves, it is also trans children who stand to be hurt greatly by the law. It is children who, in these transphobic horror stories of opportunistic men posing as trans women, we're supposed to believe are at risk of predation. And yet it is these laws that will force trans girls to use the men's restroom as trans girls will certainly have birth certificates that say "male" at least until adulthood.

It's difficult to say at this point how likely the potty police are to become a reality, but even the _threat_ has real consequences. In this respect, this law has echoes of the racist Arizona SB 1070. Despite resulting in few actual instances of law enforcement officials invoking the law (perhaps because they already had enough authority to do as they please), there was a visible [drop in immigrants seen in public places and using public facilities](http://www.marketplace.org/2010/06/14/economy/hispanics-leave-az-over-immigrant-law) according to anecdotal evidence and also evidence that the [Hispanic population dropped by 100,000 individuals](http://www.nbcnews.com/id/40141843/ns/us_news-immigration_a_nation_divided/):

> BBVA Bancomer Research, which did the study, worked with figures from the U.S. Current Population Survey. The study says the decline could be due to the law known as SB1070, which partly entered into effect in July, or to Arizona's difficult economic situation.

In this case, the papers we're expecting people to carry is unprecedented. Birth certificates may be required when applying for a passport but you aren't required to have them on your person to leave the country, and yet anyone who doesn't pass for cis, not just trans people, could have to carry this documentation. There have already been cases of [cis people who don't fit the mold in terms of gender presentation being harassed](http://lexiecannes.com/2015/06/15/cis-woman-accused-of-being-a-boy-was-manhandled-and-kicked-out-of-a-womens-bathroom-sues/).

Make no mistake, these laws aren't designed to protect anyone's safety. None of their proponents are losing sleep over the fact that they're forcing trans girls to use the men's room, and in fact they have invited a [man to undress in women's facilities](http://www.krem.com/news/local/northwest/man-in-womens-locker-room-cites-gender-rule/45412534) in order to push their agenda. The intent is to terrorize trans people out of public places and fight back their growing acceptance. Even without these laws taking effect, they play a role in harassment trans individuals receive.

But beyond just controlling trans people, this measure and the many across the country like it threaten all of our rights. It threatens to make a document a bigger part of our daily existence. It threatens anyone, not just trans people, who would present themselves in a way that would raise any doubts at all about their gender. The key to laying oppressive laws and oppressive social mores on the general population is by using the most vulnerable as a test bed. To be trans is, among other things, to have a document with unnecessary, false information haunt you. But it would benefit us all to end birth assignment as a legal and cultural practice altogether, rather than granting it new, unprecedented powers over us.

* * *

## Original Suggestions per Bobby

Some potential ideas for a piece on NC one of you lovelies could write:

* "Papers, please." NC's law bases bathroom access on birth certificates. Who carries one of those around? This means trans and GNC people will have to keep a copy with them just to use the bathroom. And that's assuming a trans person even has an amended BC.

* Classism. Changing your birth certificate can be an arduous and expensive process. Often states will only allow BCs to be changed if given proof of bottom surgery, another thing that's out of reach to many trans people. (A few, including Ohio, won't let you change it at all.) This law bases basic human dignity -- access to the bathroom -- on how much money you have. People who don't have access to safe bathrooms at home -- like the huge population of houseless trans people -- are harmed even further. Of course this class divide will become even more stark, since the bill legalizes discrimination of any kind on the basis of sexual orientation, gender identity, or gender presentation -- employment, housing, you name it. Trans people are expected to be independently wealthy and jump through dozens of legal hoops and simultaneously face harsh barriers to even earning enough to stay alive.

* Lateral oppression. Gender nonconforming people will be hurt by this law same as any trans person who doesn't "pass". Butch cis lesbians are sure to be harassed for this; there was already a high-profile case where a lawmaker threatened to expose himself to a cis woman he thought was trans. Even Cathy Brennan, TERF scum whose life is dedicated to killing trans women, opposes the bathroom laws on this basis.

* Cis and trans unity. We have a scenario where trans women have been used as a scapegoat to deny cis queers their rights. This topic has a long and storied history; "trans" and "queer" didn't used to be such discrete entities, and became that way largely so that cis queers could engage in respectability politics. You could write about how this is a wake-up call for cis queers to stand with their trans community members.

* Sexual assault. We know the trans bathroom predator trope is bullshit, but you could write an article interviewing trans women who are sexual assault survivors and make a really hard-hitting emotional piece about how these bills expose (trans) women and girls to risk in the guise of helping them.

* Gender neutrality. Over and over, articles repeat the lie that trans-inclusive bathroom ordinances make them gender-neutral. This is baseless fearmongering from the right. Call them on that, but then make a proactive argument for how gender-neutral bathrooms would be an improvement. Then contrast your argument for gender-neutral bathrooms with the regressive, fearmongering rhetoric of merely continuing to allow gender-segregated access by trans people. You could bring nonbinary issues into this one.

* Suicide and murder-by-proxy. Speak about empirical evidence that institutional cissexism increases trans suicide in terms that place the blame squarely on the lawmakers. This is not a suicide epidemic, it is a murder epidemic.

* Capitalism. You think it's a coincidence that this bill just happened to also ban minimum wage increases? Draw on intersectional and socialist feminist traditions and discuss the connections between transmisogyny and capitalism.

* The prison-industrial complex and cruel and unusual punishment. Trans people arrested for violating these absurd laws will be subjected to even further cruelty -- often including repeated sexual assault and psychological abuse -- by being housed in jails and prisons of the wrong gender.

Come on guys, we don't need another article repeating the identical summary rundown and quotes by the HRC or whatever. This shit is fucking important.

Even if you're not a writer, you can write letters to the editor of your local papers and public Facebook posts. Make some fucking noise.